quite a bit we go in part one a few
basic facts about the moon here's a full
moon image that I generated using my 10
inch telescope a few years ago nearly
full is a little bit missing up at the
top right hand side there but the moon
is a quarter of the diameter is the
earth it's very hard to us for us to
tell but that makes it quite a sizable
solar system body but a quarter to the
power three is a 64th
and so the amount of material contained
inside the moon is rather less than that
of the earth and if we work out the mass
of it we discover that the mass of the
moon is only 180th of the Earth's mass
so that tells us something about its
density its overall average density is a
bit less than that of the earth and
we'll see why that is as we go forward
in orbit around the Earth of course the
average distance 384,000 kilometers
which is about a quarter of a million
miles and as we know it almost always
keeps the same face facing towards the
earth so it rotates around its own axis
at the same rate that it rotate that it
revolves around the earth taking a month
to do each now because of the elliptical
nature of the moon's orbit bit closer at
some times and further away at others
and just tonight on the news they're
talking all about that I'm talking about
super moons and he seems to have become
a very popular thing for the media to
get interested in I personally find it a
little disappointing that they make so
much of it because the difference really
between a super moon when the moon is at
its closest point and a micro moon as
they call it when it's at its furthest
point from the earth is only twelve
percent difference in the diameter does
make it a little bit brighter
then it would otherwise be and it's
really just a question of whether you
get a full moon at the same point in the
moon's journey around the earth that
happens to be the closest point to the
earth so it's really something that's a
prayer in fact little diagram here
though little animation that shows the
moon over a period you can see how it's
rotating and wobbling and actually we
get to see about 57% of the overall
total area of the moon this is because
although it spins at a constant speed
the velocity around its elliptical orbit
changes with it moving faster when it's
at the near point and more slowly when
it's at the far point in its orbit in
accordance with Kepler's laws and so
sometimes that rotation gets ahead other
times it gets behind and of course the
orbit is tilted at about 5 degrees so
this phenomenon is called library' Chien
and allows us to see just around little
peaks around the corners really around
the edge of the moon to sometimes see
some craters and little bits of terrain
that we would not otherwise be able to
spot so I think this animation makes
that point quite nicely I've already
told you the answer to this question how
far is it to the moon and just to put
that to scale here's the earth and the
moon with the gap between them at the
same scale as the size of the objects so
you can see there's really quite a lot
of space between them and the moon
really is quite a long way away in
comparison to its own diameter the first
person to have a go at working outlet
finding an answer was Aristarchus of
Samos
and you can see one of his drawings here
of course it's all in Greek so we we
can't and directly read it or at least I
can't but the three circular objects
that are represented there are the Sun
the moon and the earth and he was
working out geometry and different
methods of trying to get a an idea of
how far away each of the bodies were and
their sizes so can it spin a little he's
good what he realized was that at her
phase the Earth Moon and Sun make up a
right angle triangle if we can see
exactly half of the moon then it means
the line from the center of the moon to
the center of the Sun is at right angles
to the one from the center of the moon
to us here on earth so what he did was
measure the angle between the moon and
the Sun in the sky and he got an answer
of 87 degrees a very long thin triangle
and from the shape of that triangle he
can conclude that the Sun is 19 times
further away from us then the moon is
you can't work out the absolute size of
the triangle but you can work out the
relative lengths of the different edges
near the true angle for that angle at
the Earth there's not 87 degrees
nowadays we realize it's actually eighty
nine point five and the difference that
makes is that it's means that the Sun is
actually four hundred times further away
than the moon it's an even longer
thinner triangle the reason for the
difference is that he was looking
through the Earth's atmosphere of course
and the Earth's atmosphere refracts
images vary slightly and so you get that
extra what is it two and a half degrees
that you need to allow for for the
bending of the light as it comes in it
also spotted the cosmic
incidents though that the moon and the
Sun appear the same size in the sky the
picture above there is of a total solar
eclipse where the black disk of the moon
is just the right size to cover the disk
of the Sun again of course that vary
slightly depending on whether the moon
is at its near point to the earth or a
far point from the earth in its orbit
it's slightly elliptical orbit but
typically it's just the right size
they're both about half a degree in the
sky and so our stock has concluded that
whatever the ratio of the distances the
Sun must be proportionally that much
larger than the moon so he would have
concluded it was 19 times bigger than
the moon we would now make the same
pronouncement and say that the Sun must
be 400 times further away and 400 times
larger than the moon and that is looked
at lunar eclipses and I won't go into
the details of the geometry and the
mathematics because it's a little bit
complicated but he realized that by
looking at how the moon passed into the
Earth's shadow as shown in the diagram
above there and the shape of the earth
shadow carving across the moon and the
time that the moon spent being eclipsed
he could work out all the other
parameters and end up with calculations
that told him the distances and the
sizes of the objects all individually so
he did a very good job of coming to all
of these conclusions they didn't
necessarily get exactly the right answer
but the methods were very sound now some
too
years later the Royal radar
establishment decided that they would
have a go at measuring the distance to
the moon and in 1958 they bounced some
radar beams off the moon and picked up
the returning signals and from the
round-trip delay and their knowledge of
the speed of light they worked out that
the distance was 384 402 plus or minus
1.2 kilometers
very much more accurate than any other
measure to date at that time and at the
bottom there as it says the pulse was
two megawatts of power being transmitted
so very powerful radar signal and each
pulse lasted just five microseconds now
a light travels nearly a mile in five
microseconds and so that's why the plus
or minus one point two kilometers was
the limiting factor in their ability to
really resolve the distance a slightly
more up-to-date version of this is the
lunar rangefinder and this was left on
the moon by Apollo you got the
photograph there with the footprints on
the moving around it and this slightly
angled array of prisms their right angle
prisms so if you shine a beam of light
into it it bounces off the two surfaces
and comes right back to you
and so from Earth we could fire a laser
beam and aim it at this device on the
moon and the light would travel there
and then be reflected and come back and
again we could measure that and using a
laser and much more up-to-date measuring
equipment yet very short pulses and
therefore very accurate measurements of
the distance and the interesting part
about that is that the laser beam well
though it looks narrow and almost like
it's not going to diverge at all by the
time it arrived at the moon it was six
and a half kilometers wide so spread out
over quite a large area that makes
aiming it rather easier you only have to
get the reflector somewhere in that six
and a half kilometer diameter circle but
it does mean that the amount of power
that comes back is really quite weak so
you needed very very sensitive detectors
to be able to pick the reflections up
but they were able to time it to one
picosecond
that's one in part in ten to the twelve
of a second and measure the distance to
the moon with an accuracy of naught
point two five millimeters by doing this
so very very precise indeed a security
of trace the fact that the moon is
spiraling away from us it's moving away
at currently in about 3.8 centimeters
every year its orbit is just getting
larger and larger and you can trace the
theory back and realize that a long time
ago perhaps the orbit was much much
smaller and indeed it probably formed at
a distance of twenty four thousand
kilometers above the earth so really
very close indeed
now the reason that the moon is moving
away from us because if the effect of
the tides it's a tidal drag the angular
momentum of the moon is being Sept
because as the moon goes around the
earth it pulls with its gravity the two
tidal bulges in the ocean that you can
see there and due to the fact the earth
spinning and the bulges end ups being
slightly offset from the direction of
the moon and so it creates a talk which
tries to pull the moon into a different
orbit it also slows the earth down
making our days longer so several
billion years ago the earth today was
sixteen hours long and now it's
increased at a rate of about a
microsecond a year to the point where
it's now 23 hours and 56 minutes and 20
seconds so it's that the fate of the
tides that's gradually driving the moon
away was also the effect of the tides so
that's caused the moon to keep that one
face pointing towards us and if we look
far enough forward in time the earth
will be slowed down by this same effect
to the point where the earth also keeps
one face facing out towards the somewhat
more distant moon but that's about ten
billion years ahead so it's not
something that we really
need to worry about mostly because the
Sun will have swelled up and eaten both
of them by then as a red giant but
that's another story
so let's go back and look at the moon in
a bit more detail is that same fear of
the full moon and the first thing that
you notice is that it has these dark
markings on it the Maurya the seas of
the moon these smooth looking regions
then it has highland regions that are
peppered in brighter craters and some of
the craters have these very dramatic
Ray's emanating out from them so which
seem to go almost right around the moon
particularly from the big bright crater
at the bottom they're called Tycho we'll
have a look at that in a bit more detail
in a minute observers point of view you
should always try and look at the moon a
variety of different phases the full
moon has this particular appearance but
at other times half moon the shadows
falling along the day-night boundary
which we call the Terminator ah very
good picking out the detail and you can
see on this picture all sorts of detail
and the craters there at the bottom
about a third of the way up you can see
the straight wall which is just a
sloping hillside but with a shadow cast
just by the effect of the crest of the
hill there making that straight line
through what is a medium-sized crater
and then we go right on up up to the top
where we can see the Mauri Imbrium being
cut in half by the day-night boundary
and then their crater Plato gonna look
at that in a bit more detail so here's a
zoom in on some of the Maurya and when
we look at these we realize they are
actually all very much round and
surrounded by a rim of mountains and the
flaws of them are very small very smooth
indeed this is of course why the ancient
Greeks thought they might be filled with
some sort of liquid and called them seas
because of that smooth texture
but clearly not because they looked
substantial craters and other features
on them that are permanent but of course
the reason is that they were flooded
with molten lava at one point early on
just after they were formed and so the
smooth texture is the result of the
liquid so they weren't entirely wrong
now the other thing that happens is that
features on the moon get exposed to the
solar wind the harsh radiation coming
from the Sun and this turns the lunar
material darker with age so that the
Maurya the Seas are very dark looking
and they are very old whereas the
fresher material looks much brighter and
you can use this as a means of aging
with the particular bits of terrain on
the moon
a way of its end the age though is to
look at the craters here's the southern
polar region of the moon again and you
can see there are craters stacked on top
of craters on top of craters and of
course the ones that are right at the
top must be the youngest and they
overlay the older ones and so from the
stacking order we can work out which
craters came in which order and some
people obviously spent many hundreds of
hours trying to sift through all of that
and understand the relative ages of all
of the craters and we also noticed that
on the whole the craters that are at the
bottom our big ones and the smaller
craters tend to be quite numerous but
they tend to be in the foreground so to
speak and this tells us something about
the history of how the craters got there
in that in ancient times long back in
the dawn of the solar system there were
still quite a lot of big space rocks
flying around smashing into the moon and
making these large craters and but
gradually over time that the number of
large impacts has diminished and the
average stuff that's been falling in in
later times has been all the much more
common much smaller space rocks making
many more small craters
in our a Imbrium is a nice zooming
picture of the region at the top of
Murray Imbrium there and the crater
Plato this is a crater but it could have
that very very smooth floor to it again
and this is because it was flooded with
molten lava it's given it that very very
smooth appearance indeed and just
running away from it to the side there
you can see a wiggly little line we will
talk about those in a minute
but also ringed on this picture is the
alpine valley has quite a prominent
feature to see round about half moon and
this is evidence of where two parts of
the moon's crust have pulled apart and
much as the Great Rift Valley in Africa
as the result of the terrain separating
and falling down in the crack between
the same thing has been happening at
some point in the history of the moon as
well their favorite crater to show
people during our public observing
evenings on the moon is the Messier
crater
it's a crater pear in fact you can see
them here very bright they're relatively
young craters and you can see the
ejector leading from one of the craters
down to the bottom left-hand corner
they're in a very narrow track so what
we think happened here is that a space
rock came in and hit the moon created
the first slightly elliptical crater
bounced 20 kilometers and landed again
making the second crater and then all
the shattered ejector was projected off
downrange even a photograph of those two
so you can see there a elliptical nature
of the first impact and then the
unsymmetrical second crater where the
ejector has pretty much all gone one way
it really tells the story of it so very
very nice object to look out on the moon
if you can find it here's that
crater Tycho at the southern region of
the moon there with it's very prominent
rays it's very bright and it's also on
top of most of the other craters
that tells us it's age is very young it
must be fairly recent because not a lot
is landed and obscured any of the
features that it generated when it was
created in the first place and we think
that the age for this is about a hundred
and seven million years which is nothing
compared to the roughly four billion
years of the age of the Moon we also see
crater chains quite a few of them on the
moon here lots of crater chains these
are where some sort of incoming object
perhaps a comet has been torn apart
either by the gravity of the moon or
more likely by the gravity of larger
objects such as the earth and then
smashed into the ground one fragment at
a time and created these linear chains
of craters there
in the middle of the seas we see
wrinkled ridges you can see them picked
out quite nicely in this particular
photograph and this is where shrinkage
has occurred as the lava that flooded
the sea area the moir cooled down it
then shrank and that resulted in these
little wrinkle patterns as the different
parts cooled at different rates
what about volcanoes on the old we do
see some they're pretty much extinct
nowadays we think although some people
seem to think they see occasional
eruptions of something of gas or
something on the moon called transient
lunar phenomena I've never seen one
myself and I've never seen a decent
photograph of one either but perhaps
someone will cash it in action one day
so you do find in addition to all the
impact craters that there are these
cone-shaped
mountains that are obviously of volcanic
origin and they often have these Wiggly
lines as you can see here running away
from them and those are called rules or
grabens and here's a really good example
of one running across the surface this
rather straight but they often can
wiggle around a lot and they tend to
stretch for quite long distances across
the surface of the Moon particularly
where there's been volcanic activity and
of course they are lava tubes here's a
lava tube in Hawaii you can go down and
explore it this is where lava was
running away from the active volcano and
the outer edge of the running lava being
exposed to the atmosphere cools and
forms a crust but the liquid lava then
continues to flow as long as the volcano
is feeding it through the tunnel that
has been made until eventually the
volcano stops erupting and the lava
flows out the far end of these tunnels
and you end up with long long tunnels
underground and of course
weathering and so forth can mean that
the roof falls in and that's what
creates the the rills on the moon we
think though is responsible for these
features we see called lunar pits here
it looks like there is a lava tube under
the ground and the roof has fallen in in
this very nice circular fashion I don't
know whether that was the result of an
impact punching a hole through or just
the result of a collapse and we've never
really explored these but it would be
quite interesting to be able to send
some sort of remote Rover or something
down into these pits and tubes and
explore underneath the lunar surface a
bit at some stage it's the same thing on
a lava flow in Hawaii where there's
still the lava flowing in the lava tube
underneath but the surface has already
fallen in
the same process creates these great
long sinuous chains of what they call
endo genic craters again they following
the route of a collapsed lava tube it
took scientists quite a while to figure
out what was going on with these
interesting chains of craters